---
project: buildsystem
title: "seL4 11.0.x-compatible"
archive: true
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# Updates to the Build system from seL4 10.1.x to 11.0.x

## seL4_tools/cmake-tool
- `dts.cmake`: Suppress output from `dtc` unless it doesn't produce an output file.
- `application_settings.cmake`: Disable kernel printing in release builds.
- `dts.cmake`: Use dts files from the kernel repository.
- `rootserver.cmake`: Support building RISC-V with `gcc-8`.
- Split `common.cmake` into `simulation.cmake`, `cpio.cmake` and `rootserver.cmake`.
- Remove `AddLegacyLibrary` function. This was used to wrap old build system libraries and is no longer used.
- `cpio.cmake`: Support constructing multiple CPIO archives within the same build directory.
- Style all CMake files and python scripts.
- Add `make.cpio` module with `MakefileDepsToList`, `create_depfile_by_find` and `execute_process_with_stale_check` helpers.
  These helpers add mechanisms for not re-running expensive `execute_process` commands during build
  configurations if inputs to the command are not stale.
- Add `cmakerepl` script for inline debugging of CMake scripts.
- Add `debug.cmake` that adds `set_break()` CMake function for limited CMake variable inspection.
- Add `griddle` tool to enable easy build scenarios:
  - Automatically add additional CMake initialization flags on first init.
  - Present project build configuration options based on an `easy-settings.cmake` file.
  - Detect when `CMakeCache.txt` file is unstable and re-run cmake until it stabalizes.
  - Inform user about config stability.
  - Provide a `--platform-hel` option for listing all kernel supported platforms.
  - Handle platform toolchain configuration requirements.
- `init-build.sh`: tidy script and remove bash-isms to make POSIX-compliant.
- `rootserver.cmake`: Support `uimage` format for ArmV7 platforms.
- Add scripts in `helpers/` to `CMAKE_MODULE_PATH` and support importing on demand.
- `cakeml.cmake`: Add support for multiple CakeML libraries within a project.
  `Holmake` doesn't support concurrent builds of different projects, so multiple builds need to be serialized.
- Add `platform_sift.py` script for extracting platform memory region descriptions from a YAML file outputted by kernel build.
- `init-build.sh`: Remove multiple CMake invocations and only call CMake once.
- `application_settings.cmake`: Add `correct_platform_strings` for converting conventional `-DPLATFORM` values to
  valid `KernelPlatform` and `KernelSel4Arch` settings.
- `flags.cmake`: Use the runtime objects from `sel4runtime` rather than `musl`.
- `flags.cmake`: Always use `__aeabi_read_tp` for aarch32 by setting `-mtp=soft`.
- Require `-C settings.cmake` for initializing CMake projects.
  This supports the new build structure where instead of blindly including
  every `settings.cmake` file in every `projects/` folder, we instead require a single `settings.cmake` file to be passed in.
- Add `check_arch_compiler.cmake`. This triggers errors if the incorrect compiler is selected.
- Add `nanopb.cmake` for nanopb support.
- `rust_targets`: Update `x86_64-target.json` to new format.
- `application_settings.cmake`: `ApplyData61ElfLoaderSettings` RISCV support.
- Add `elf_sift.py` script for computing ELF image loadable segment sizes.
- Add `shoehorn.py` script for computing load addresses of Elfloader, Kernel and User images in memory.
- Add `make-uimage` script to extract the entry point (start symbol) of an ELF executable and wrap the object in a
    chain-loadable payload for use by the U-Boot boot loader.
- `Holmakefile.in`, `buildScript.sml.in`, `cakeml.cmake`: Update CakeML build scripts for newer CakeML version.
- `simulate.py`: Add `tput reset` to end of Qemu command for when Qemu leaves the terminal in an inconsistent state.
- Remove global `Configuration` CMake library. Each build artifact should instead control its own configuration dependencies.
- Add `environment_flags.cmake` module for use in modules that are used for defining system environment build flags.
- Move `musllibc` rules from `flags.cmake` to `Findmusllibc.cmake` CMake module and merge remainder of `flags.cmake` with `base.cmake`.
- Mark CMake cache variables advanced by default and allow final project configuration to explicitly show options in the `ccmake` GUI.
- `init-build.sh`: Support alternative build structure where the top-level `CMakeLists.txt` project file is not located in the top level directory.
- Move `ccache` settings to compiler toolchain files.
- `cpio.cmake`: Change strategy for constructing cpio archive object file to use linker instead of objcopy.
- `simulation.cmake`: Add new `qemu-arm-virt` platform simulator options with hyp support.
- `rust_targets`: add `aarch64-sel4-none.json` target file for Aarch64 rust targets.

## kernel

- Add functions for querying all kernel platform names and architectures.
- Add `check_outfile_stale` macro.
    This checks if a file is older than other files during CMake configure
    phase. This is to prevent unnecessary long running `execute_process`
    calls.
- Style all CMake and python files.
- Add `FORCE` to all `INTERNAL` sets.
    `INTERNAL` implies `FORCE` but in some versions of CMake if a config option
    has been passed in via a -D option the `INTERNAL` set doesn't override the
    value when it should.
    See: <https://gitlab.kitware.com/cmake/cmake/issues/19015> -
      `INTERNAL` does not imply `FORCE` for `CACHE`.
- Update `python2` --> `python3` in build scripts.
- Invoke verified configuration files to build kernel with verified configurations.
- Add `SEL4_CONFIG_DEFAULT_ADVANCED` CMake variable.  If set then all cache variable
  declarations get marked as advanced by default.
- Add device trees for every Arm and RISC-V platform.
  - Use per-config device tree overlays to customize platform layouts for different build configurations.
- Auto-generate hardware headers describing Arm and RISC-V platforms. Use these headers
  for creating Untyped objects and Kernel device binding and export YAML memory region
  file for use by other projects in build system.
- `sel4_deps`: Add `pyfdt`, `cmake-format`, `guardonce`, `pyelftools`, `autopep8`, `jsonschema` and `libarchive-c` to seL4 python package. Change `pyaml` to `pyyaml`.
- Automatically select serial and timer drivers based on device trees.
- Remove `kernel_astyle.sh` in favour of using style scripts in `sel4_tools`.
- Use device tree `chosen` node to specify kernel devices with `seL4,kernel-devices` property.
- Add `reciprocal.py` for calculating constants for reciprocal division used in MCS kernel.
- Add `seL4Config.cmake` module to kernel configurations folder for use in CMake `-C` configuration scripts.
  This enables picking kernel platform settings before any projects are configured and also allows
  automatically picking the right toolchain files.

