---
project: sel4test
title: "seL4 11.0.x-compatible"
archive: true
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# Updates to seL4Test from seL4 10.1.x to 11.0.x

## External

- List valid platforms if invalid platform is provided in build configuration.
- Add `IPCRIGHTS` tests for master and mcs to test new `grantreply` access right:
  - `IPCRIGHTS0001`, "seL4_Send needs write"
  - `IPCRIGHTS0002`, "seL4_Recv needs read"
  - `IPCRIGHTS0003`, "seL4_Send with caps needs grant"
  - `IPCRIGHTS0004`, "seL4_Call needs grant or grant-reply"
  - `IPCRIGHTS0005`, "seL4_Reply grant depends of the grant of previous seL4_Recv"
- add test `UNKNOWN_SYSCALL_001`, "Test seL4_VMEnter in a non-vm thread" to check cannot enter VM in no-vm thread on x86.
- Added tests for maximum ASID pools usage:
  - `VSPACE0003`, "Test create multiple ASID pools"
  - `VSPACE0004`, "Test running out of ASID pools"
  - `VSPACE0005`, "Test overassigning ASID pool"
  - `VSPACE0006`, "Test touching all available ASID pools"
- Add griddle support to sel4test via `easy-settings.cmake` file.
- Re-enable serial_server tests on RISC-V with addition of userlevel serial driver.
- Change timeout time for `PREEMPT_REVOKE` to make test more robust.
- Added tests to check IRQ routing:
  - `SMPIRQ0001`, "Test multicore irqs"
- Enable TLS tests for RISC-V as they are now supported.
- Change RISC-V bad instruction value to `0xffffffff` in fault tests. This change was motivated by some simulators not
    trapping `0x00000000` or `0x0000` as invalid instructions.
- Enable timer tests on RISC-V.
- Disable flaky `SCHED0000` on RISCV.
- Update vspace test to support 40 bit PAs
- add `NUM_NODES` to override `KernelMaxNumNodes`.
    This allows users to pass NUM_NODES on the command line to an init-build
    invocation and override the default of `4` cores when `SMP=ON`. Example:
    `../init-build.sh -DPLATFORM=imx8mq-evk -DAARCH32=1 -DSMP=1 -DNUM_NODES=2`
- Disable device mem tests for spike.
- Change frame tests to not try and steal timer device frame from runtime and instead request device frames
  more reliably.
- set `Sel4testHaveTimer` and `Sel4testHaveCache` options to advanced if `Sel4testAllowSettingsOverride` is not set.
  Otherwise any changes to these settings will get overridden.
- Set `SEL4_CONFIG_DEFAULT_ADVANCED=On`. This will cause most CMake config options to be hidden apart from ones
  expected to be changed.
- Add MCS option for configuring `KernelIsMCS`. `-DMCS=ON` will enable MCS configurations and `-DMCS=OFF` will use mainline
    configurations.
- Remove `Remap` and use `Map` instead in mapping tests due to kernel API change.
- RISCV: Disable huge page test for Ariane
- `MULTICORE0003`: Extend to test different VSpaces.
    On x86 the kernel was only performing TLB cross-core invalidation if the
    VSpace that was being unmapped was running on the current core.  This
    means that if a core unmaps a page from a different VSpace running on a
    different core then the cross-core invalidation wouldn't happen.
    We extend `MULTICORE0003` to test unmapping from different VSpaces as well
    as the same VSpace. We also now repeat the test a few times for if a
    kernel timer IRQ is received during any of them leading to a false
    success.

## Internal

- Correctly initialize clocks for exynos5422 serial driver
- Improve test `SCHED0011`: compare timestamps in nanoseconds not microseconds to improve accuracy.
  Use period value instead as wait time instead of assuming 1s.
- Switch to new `libelf` and `libcpio` API
- Style source files.
- Use `seL4runtime`.
- Refactor build scripts to keep up to date with build system changes.
- Refactor object allocation to use `libsel4rpc` to dynamically allocate additional resources
  instead of trying to preallocate everything.
- Remove `autoconf.h` and global `Configuration` library usage.
- Add memory barriers in `SCHED0004` to prevent spurious failures.
- Use custom IRQ handler allocation function in IRQ allocation so that some tests may borrow the
  caps.
- Rename `CONFIG_KERNEL_RT` to `CONFIG_KERNEL_MCS`
- `MULTICORE0003`: Reduce wait time to limit timer IRQ. This makes the test more reliable.
