---
version: 0.0.1-rt-dev
redirect_from:
  - /sel4_release/seL4_0.0.1-rt-dev/
  - /sel4_release/seL4_0.0.1-rt-dev.html
variant: mcs
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# seL4 0.0.1-rt-dev


The development branch of the for the seL4 realtime extensions. This
branch is not verified and is under active development.

## Highlights


* Maximum priorities

  * Previously seL4 would not allow threads to set any other
  thread's priority to higher than its own. This has been
  extracted into a separate field for the RT kernel, a maximum
  priority, which limits what thread cans set their own or other
  threads priorities to.

* Scheduling contexts

  * This branch adds scheduling contexts to seL4, which represent
  CPU time. Scheduling contexts are separate to threads
  (although threads required one to run) and can be passed
  around over IPC.
  * Scheduling contexts allow developers to create periodic
  threads, temporally isolation threads and have variable
  timeslices for round robin threads.

For more details, please see the manual. Most of the updates are in the
threads chapter.

## API Changes


- `seL4_TCB_Configure` arguments changed (domain removed, scheduling
      context cap and max priority added).

## API Additions


- `seL4_CapSchedControl` - initial cap for control of CPU time
- `seL4_SchedContextObject` - new object for that allows threads
      access to CPU time
- `seL4_SchedContextBits` - size in bits of a scheduling context
      object
- `seL4_NBSendRecv` - new system call which allows once kernel
      invocation to perform a non-blocking send on one capability, and
      wait on another.
- `seL4_NBSendRecvWithMRs` - uses above new system call without
      touching the IPC buffer, passing only data in registers
- `seL4_Time` - type for specifying temporal units to the kernel
- `seL4_TCB_SetMaxPriority` - set the max priority for a tcb,
      threads can only start / set priorities threads up to and
      including their max priority
- `seL4_Prio_t` - type for priority and max priority, used in
      `TCB_Configure`
- `seL4_CNode_SaveTCBCaller` - save the reply cap of the target tcb.
      This allows another thread to reply on behalf of the owner of the
      reply cap.
- `seL4_SchedControl_Configure` - invokes the scheduling control cap
      to populate a scheduling context with parameters
- `seL4_SchedContext_Yield` - end the timeslice of the thread bound
      to the sched context invoked.
- `seL4_SchedContext_BindTCB` - bind a tcb to a scheduling context,
      if the TCB is runnable and scheduling context has budget, this
      will start the tcb running
- `seL4_SchedContext_UnbindTCB` - remove binding of a scheduling
      context from a tcb, tcb will no longer run but state will be
      preserved
- `seL4_CapInitThreadSC` - capability to the initial threads
      scheduling context
- `seL4_CapSchedControl` - scheduling control capability, which is
      given to the root thread
- `seL4_SchedContext_BindNotification` - Bind a notification to a
      scheduling context. Passive threads waiting on this notification
      will borrow the scheduling context.
- `seL4_SchedContext_UnbindNotification` - unbind the notification.

## API deletions


- `seL4_Yield` (replaced by `seL4_SchedContext_Yield`)
- `seL4_DomainSet`
- Domain scheduler removed.

## Library & test compatability


The 'rt' branch of `seL4_libs` has been adapted to the rt branch of seL4,
and the rt branch of sel4test has been ported to the `seL4_rt-dev-0.0.1`
kernel, along with many more tests written suited to the rt kernel. To
run it, checkout the `default.xml` manifest on the rt branch of
sel4test-manifest.

The rt branch is in no way compatible with the master branch of seL4.

More details See the `0.0.1-rt-dev` manual included in the release.
