---
version: 12.1.0
version_digits: 2
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2021 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# seL4 Version 12.1.0 Release
 Announcing the release of `seL4 12.1.0` with the following changes:

12.1.0 2021-06-10: SOURCE COMPATIBLE

## Changes

* Moved kernel configuration header to libsel4.
* Improved benchmarking:
  - Made the kernel log buffer to be derived from cmake config.
  - Added x86_64 kernel log buffer.
  - Implemented RISC-V benchmark timestamping.
  - Implemented benchmark log buffer for RISC-V.
* Moved cap functions out of inline to make changing cap bitfields less noisy.
* Removed weak definition of the __sel4_ipc_buffer variable which was causing large thread local storages to be
  required.
* Prepared the bitfield generator for Isabelle 2021.
* Made a number of improvements to the CMake build scripts.
* Added pre-processor 'include guards' for auto-generated files.
* Added missing CONFIG_PLAT_IMX7 pre-processor '#define's.
* Added `#pragma once` to the autoconf headers.
* Removed `HAVE_AUTOCONF` guards in `sel4/config.h`.
* Improved the manual:
  - Corrected descriptions of CNode addressing.
  - Documented initial thread's SMMU caps.
* Improved libsel4:
  - Removed redundant `HAVE_AUTOCONF` header guards in libsel4.
  - Added missing `macros.h` #include in libsel4.
  - Cleaned-up `macros.h` in libsel4.
  - Added checks to use `_Static_assert()` in libsel4 if it is available.
  - Unified definitions in `simple_types.h` in libsel4.
  - Added `printf` format specifier `PRI_sel4_word` for printing word types.
  - Unified seL4 type definitions.
* Added specific `printf` formatting for seL4_Word.
* Changed some variables to use `BOOT_BSS` instead of `BOOT_DATA` to save space in the ELF file.
* Replaced the `capDL()` function with a generic `debug_capDL` function that is intended to be implemented by all
  architectures.
* Reduced `printf`s stack usage.
* Fixed `ksnprintf()` corner case handling.
* Fixed NULL `printf` output wrapper handling.
* Cleaned up the printing API implementation.
* Changed code to pass buffer to `printf` output channel.
* Refactored the kernel console handling.
* Added support for `PRIu64` and `SEL4_PRIu_word` in the kernel.
* Changed various `printf` conversion specifiers to use `SEL4_PRIx_word` specifiers.

### MCS

* Fixed a physical counter access issue on MCS on EL2.
* Added MCS support for the ZynqMP.
* Changed invokeSchedControl_Configure to always produce a scheduling context that is active and has configured
  refills.
* Prevented the binding of scheduling contexts to blocked TCBs.
* Fixed conversions of ticks to microseconds on aarch64.
* Added an additional sporadic flag to `seL4_SchedControl_Configure` which allows the option to create a sporadic
  scheduling context.
* Added explicit checks to not unblock the current scheduling context.
* Fixed MCS and aarch64 VCPU interrupt interaction.
* Renamed MCS kernel configuration option `KernelStaticMaxBudgetUs` to `KernelStaticMaxPeriodUs`.
* Added check to make sure that the current thread will not yield to multiple threads.
* Added check to account for an inactive scheduling context at preemption.
* Deferred charging time budget in a preempted invocation.
* Added code to update `ksDomainTime` in `updateTimestamp`.
* Added call to `updateTimestamp` in a preemption point.
* Added code to clear ksConsume when charging time to a revoked scheduling context.
* Added code to cancel IPC when finalising reply caps.
* Fixed a dereference of a scheduling context after it's removed from the associated TCB.
* Added MCS to the preprocess check.

### x86

* Removed a redundant de-reference for `seL4_X86DangerousRDMSR` in ia32.
* Added a config option to set the frequency of the TSC.
* Optimized the boot image size for x86_64.
* Removed the PT_PHDR segment from the linker script to work around an issue in a variant of syslinux that treats a
  PT_PHDR segment as distinct from a PT_LOAD segment.

### Arm

* FPU ownership is now also given away on thread deletion instead of only on FPU exception.
* Added basic build support for A35 core.
* Fixed read/write of the VCPU CPACR register.
* Fixed invalidation of the VIPI I-cache in hypervisor mode.
* Removed duplicate interrupts for the zynqmp in its DTS.
* Updated device definitions for the exynos5.
* Added Raspberry Pi 4 support.
* Updated Ethernet interrupts in the ZynqMP.
* Added i.MX6 Nitrogen6_SoloX support.
* Fixed CMake configurations for the ZynqMP and the Ultra96.
* Fixed the platform `#define` for the i.MX6 Nitrogen6_SoloX.
* Fixed I-cache invalidation on aarch64 SMP.
* Fixed the usage of KernelPaddrUserTop on Arm platforms.
* Added support for the i.MX low-power UART.
* Added an option to ignore SErrors which is enabled on default for the TX2.

### RISC-V

* Added PLIC driver and updated the DTS for the Ariane.
* Merged the PLIC drivers for the Ariane and the Hifive.
* Updated default timer frequency for the Ariane.
* Map devices with large pages on 32 and 64-bit kernel.
* Replaced mentions of BBL with OpenSBI.
* Added definitions of the KernelOpenSBIPlatform variable for RISC-V platforms.
* Removed instances of passing `extra_caps_t` by value for binary verification purposes.
* Removed `slot_range_t` for binary verification purposes.
* Removed `DONT_TRANSLATE` tag on 'read_sip' for binary verification purposes.
* Added more efficient clz and ctz implementations to substitute the lack of machine instructions to count leading and
  trailing zeroes.
* Updated kernel bootstrap message to be the same as the one on Arm.
* Added some fastpath improvements for RISC-V.
* Added extra snippets of code to track kernel entries for RISC-V.
* Added a configuration guard for fastpath on RISC-V.
* Reorganised `traps.S` so that syscalls and fastpath checks were done after interrupts and exceptions checks to avoid
  exceptions being interpreted as null-syscalls.
* Added support for `riscv64-elf-` toolchain.
* Fixed a register bug in the assembly entry point for SMP with regards to the elfloader passing HART and core IDs.

## Upgrade Notes

* Scheduling contexts can now be configured as constant-bandwidth or sporadic server.
  - Constant bandwidth observes a continuous constant bandwidth of budget/period.
  - Sporadic server behaves as described by Sprunt et. al.
  - In an overcommitted system, sporadic preserves accumulated time.
* There are new `PRIx` and `SEL4_PRIx` `printf` conversion specifiers that can now be used inside the kernel.
* x86_64 kernel binaries are now smaller and may be structured differently compared to previous kernel binaries.
* Kernel entry benchmarking can now be done on RISC-V.
* AUTOCONF_INCLUDED is no longer defined. The seL4 build system has stopped
  using autoconf a long time ago and this define has been kept for compatibility
  since then. It is no longer used anywhere by now, so it can be removed.

# Full changelog
 Refer to the git log in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4> using `git log 12.0.0..12.1.0`

# More details
 See the
[12.1.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-12.1.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!
