---
version: 15.0.0
version_digits: 2
project: sel4
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 seL4 International
---

# seL4 Version 15.0.0 Release

Announcing the release of `seL4 15.0.0` with the following changes:


## 15.0.0 2026-03-31: BREAKING

### Changes

* Add runtime domain schedule configuration.
  See [RFC-20](https://sel4.github.io/rfcs/implemented/0200-domain-schedules.html).
* libsel4: make thread-local IPC buffer optional (see `LibSel4UseThreadLocals`).
* The `KernelAllowSMCCalls` option can now be used for verification builds
* Update documentation on `seL4_X86_EPT_VMAttributes`
* Update documentation for `seL4_VMEnter()`
* Bitfield generator: support for simple arithmetic expressions and new `field_ptr` keyword for reducing the need for
  `#ifdef` in bitfield definitions
* Fix: Allow threads to enable the FPU for their own TCB. The API allowed this before, but the change would only take
  effect the next time the thread was scheduled.

#### Platforms

* Add support for Rock3b (AArch64)
* Add support for Banana Pi BPI-F3 (RISC-V)

#### X86

* Allow user space reads from `VMX_CONTROL_SECONDARY_PROCESSOR_CONTROLS`. Previously only writes were allowed.
* Do not force 64-bit VCPU mode for `X86_64_VTX_64BIT_GUESTS` to enable guests managing their own mode transition, e.g.
  for UEFI firmware.
* Allow user space reads and writes to `VMX_CONTROL_ENTRY_CONTROLS` field, e.g. for enabling long mode and loading of
  certain MSRs on VM Entry.
* Allow `CR0.PE` and `CR0.PG` to be cleared if "Unrestricted Guest" mode is supported by the host CPU. This mode allows
  guest software to run in unpaged protected mode or in real-address mode.
* Skip the boot time clock sync test on Qemu, because timing is too unreliable under simulation
* Improve boot code error reporting on UART

#### ARM

* Support for choosing between GICv2 and GICv3 on Qemu
* Avoid trapping CPACR_EL1 accesses in hypervisor mode
* Performance improvements for FPU switching


### Upgrade Notes

If using domains, replace any custom `domain_schedule.c` file with initialisation code in user space, or use
corresponding features in user-space frameworks such as Microkit and CAmkES. With MCS, the domain duration is now
configured in timer ticks instead of microseconds.



## Full changelog

Refer to the git log in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4> using `git log 14.0.0..15.0.0`

## More details

See the
[15.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-15.0.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!