---
version: 16.0.0
version_digits: 2
project: sel4
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 seL4 International
---

# seL4 Version 16.0.0 Release

Announcing the release of `seL4 16.0.0` with the following changes:


## 16.0.0 2026-07-22: BREAKING

This release focusses on validating assumptions, improving checks in unverified code, and fixing known issues.

The MCS configuration for 64-bit RISC-V now has a functional correctness proof, and the functional correctness proof for
MCS on AArch64 is ongoing. A number of the issues fixed below were discovered in these proofs.

### Security-relevant Changes

* Fixed a potential kernel crash in cache maintenance operations on AArch32 (Armv7). When a stale frame capability was
  used for cache maintenance operations, the kernel would previously not check whether the frame was still mapped or
  not. Performing cache maintenance on unmapped frames would lead to a fault during kernel execution which would crash
  the system. This also affects verified AArch32 configurations, because cache maintenance operations are a verification
  assumption.
  * Affected configurations: AArch32 configurations of seL4 with hypervisor extensions off (kernel runs in
    EL1), including verified configurations. Configurations where seL4 runs in EL2 are not affected.
  * Affected versions: all previous versions
  * Exploitability: Any user-level thread with sufficient authority to perform all of the following operations can
    create an unmapped stale frame cap and then trigger the issue by performing a cache maintenance operation on it: map
    frame, map page table, unmap page table. Microkit and CAmkES systems do not give their component access to these
    capabilities, but any component with Untyped capabilities could create threads with enough capabilities to trigger
    the issue.
  * Severity: Critical. This crashes the system.

* Fixed a VM escape in `restore_vmx()` on x86-64. A malicious virtual machine monitor in cooperation with a malicious
  guest could trigger the kernel to jump to a user-crafted address on VM entry failure, leading to arbitrary code
  execution in kernel mode on VT-x for 64-bit guests.
  * Affected configurations: unverified x86-64 configurations with VT-x and `KernelX86_64VTX64BitGuests`
    enabled.
  * Affected versions: 13.0.0, 14.0.0, 15.0.0
  * Exploitability: any thread with a VCPU capability (usually the VMM) and cooperation from the VM guest can trigger
    the failure path. A guest VM alone cannot trigger the entry failure, it requires a cooperating VMM.
  * Severity: Critical. Arbitrary code execution in kernel mode.

* Fixed context-switching leak for register `PAR_EL1` on AArch32 and AArch64 in hypervisor mode and potential
  overwriting of `PAR_EL1` in VCPU fault handling on AArch64. This also affects verified Arm configurations, because
  context switching is a verification assumption.
  * Affected configurations: AArch32 in hypervisor mode and AArch64 in hypervisor mode
  * Affected versions: all previous versions for AArch32, since 9.0.0 for AArch64
  * Exploitability: in any EL1 thread, a specifically timed write to `PAR_EL1` or a specifically timed VCPU fault could
    overwrite the value of `PAR_EL1` in another thread that was context switched after it wrote, but before it was
    trying to read back the value. This does not affect EL0 threads.
  * Severity: Medium. Limited compromise of integrity of `PAR_EL1` in EL1 threads.

### Changes

* Add `seL4_DebugGetThreadAffinity()` syscall to return the current affinity of a thread
  in SMP configurations.
* Add new libsel4 constant `seL4_UserVSpaceTop` which is a *inclusive* value representing
  the highest available address available to user level. The existing constant
  `seL4_UserTop` is a mix of inclusive and exclusive across existing platforms, however,
  changing this to be consistent would break userspace and require proof updates.
* Deprecate the existing `seL4_UserTop` define.
* Fix libsel4 TCB_Write/ReadRegister to respect `count`. Previously TCB_WriteRegisters/ReadRegisters
  ignored the count parameter and unconditionally copied the entire seL4_UserContext.
* Add support for GCC 14. In particular, fix a miscompilation of GCC 14.2 for seL4_Yield on RISC-V.
* Decrease TCB_SIZE_BITS for configs that MCS + SMP + HYP + benchmarking enabled.
* Make full physical address space available to Untypeds on 32-bit platforms. Affects Arm and RISC-V.
  This means there should no longer be a cascade of smaller and smaller Untyped caps reaching up to
  2^32 - 2^seL4_MinUntypedBits.
* Add further checks and debug printing for memory regions provided at boot (Arm and RISC-V).
* Add debug warning when IPC messages are truncated
* MCS: fix missing cap fault info in `sendFaultIPC`
* MCS: fix missing cap fault info in `lookupReply`
* MCS: reliably export timer frequency to userspace in cmake

### Platforms

* Add support for the stm32mp2 SoC family
* Add support for the bcm2712 SoC (RPI5)

#### X86

* Expose VMX-preemption timer scale MSR via `seL4_X86_VCPU_ReadMSR`.
* Manual: fix incorrect argument description for X86PageMapEPT.
* Fix misaligned stack during exception printing in DEBUG configs.
* Fix potential loss of IRQ notification events in VT-x + SMP configs.
* Fix register clobber declarations for `restore_vmx()` for clang builds.
* Fix interrupt source override padding in ACPI parsing
* Fix PC corruption when exiting kernel lock via `ipiStallCoreCallback()`. When a thread was in the
  process of entering the kernel lock and at the same time the core was being stalled, the restart
  program counter of this thread was corrupted.
* Add validation for BIOS provided MADT entry size, and ensure aligned access.
* Remove unused trailing padding block in boot info.
* libsel4: export `seL4_IOPageTableIndexBits` and `seL4_IOPageTableEntryBits`
* libsel4: export `seL4_X86_IOSpace_CapData` type

#### ARM

* Add support for ARM Cortex-A76
* Change default for `KernelArmHypEnableVCPUCP14SaveAndRestore` to `OFF` to provide equal defaults for
  verification and release builds. This affects AArch32/hyp only.
* Change default for `KernelArmVtimerUpdateVOffset` to `OFF`, which is the setting supported in
  verification builds and used in most projects.
* Add debug info printing for invalid vector entry
* GICv3: enable the system register interface at EL2 in hypervisor configurations. Previously only
  `ICC_SRE_EL1` was set, but not `ICC_SRE_EL2`. Guest accesses to `ICC_SRE_EL1` now always trap to
  the kernel and are delivered to the VMM as a VCPU fault.
* Remove read-only `ISR_EL1` from VCPU context. The register cannot be context-switched by the kernel.
* Fix missing `dsb` in `seL4_ARM_Page_Unify_Instruction`.
* MCS: fix missing queue check in MCS/Arm VCPU interaction

### Upgrade Notes

* AArch32 with hypervisor mode enabled only: if the option `KernelArmHypEnableVCPUCP14SaveAndRestore` is required,
  manually set it to `ON` in the build.
* User-level allocation libraries for 32-bit platforms need to be robust for Untyped caps whose physical address range
  reaches the end of the address space. If `base` and `size` are the physical address base of an Untyped cap and its
  size, patterns such as `addr < base + BIT(size)` are not overflow safe. Change these into `addr <= base + MASK(size)`.
  (`size` will always be < 32, in particular <= `seL4_MaxUntypedBits`).



## Full changelog

Refer to the git log in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4> using `git log 15.0.0..16.0.0`

## More details

See the
[16.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-16.0.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!