---
version: 4.0.0
redirect_from:
  - /sel4_release/seL4_4.0.0/
  - /sel4_release/seL4_4.0.0.html
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# Introducing seL4 4.0.0
 Announcing the release of `seL4 4.0.0`
with the following changes:

## General:

- Reorder bootinfo structure.
- Add missing `seL4_AllRights` macro in libsel4.
- Disallow kernel from using a device frame as an IPC buffer.
- Syscall docs in manual now generated by doxygen.
- Changes to make verification easier.
- Various documentation fixes.
- Benchmarks refactoring.
- Coding style fixes.
- Support for TLB and Cache management.
- Preemptible backwards memzero for Retype.
- Support for TCB operations in X86 multicore.
- Support for raspberry-pi 3.
- Add seL4_BenchmarkFlushCaches() for arm and ia32.

## ARM specific changes:
- ARM Hyp refactoring.
- Update VCPU fault definitions.
- Add userspace invocations for hardware debugging.
- Enable PMU export for V8.
- Support ARM MPCore registers.
- Fix config dependency for 'IPC Buffer location'.
- Use new cap rights structures in iospace.
- Move initial setting of TPIDRURW register.
- Support for prefetcher on Cortex-A9.
- Fix fastpath_restore on ARM Hyp and implement slowpath and restore in C.
- am335x: Prevent out of bounds array access.

### TK1

- Remove temporary SMMU memory mapping support.
- Correct SMMU PD and PT indexing.
- Split the mux controller from the misc region.

### OMAP:
- Fix issues with OMAP IRQ Code.

## X86 specific changes:
- Add userspace invocations for hardware debugging.
- Avoid writing the fs/gs base unless necessary.
- Explicitly declare address of .phys.bss.
- Add BSS regions for BOOT and PHYS code.
- Write FS and GS base when restoring user context.
- Initialize store area when using XSAVE variant instructions.
- Efficiently pack objects for fastpath.
- Increase IPI words to 3.
- Support for x2APIC.
- Support larger XSAVE region sizes.
- Change ia32 to use fs register for IPC buffer.
- Update the bootinfo for number of cores.
- Initial support for SMP vt-x.
- Split CPU ID management into mode and general.
- Fix cpuid family/model composition.
- Add X86_64 support.

# Implementation improvements

-   Several enhancements for both `x86` and `ARM` have
    been made. Please see the commit log for details.

# Upgrade notes


- This release breaks both API and ABI and is not source compatible
      with the earlier versions. Read more here:
      <https://research.csiro.au/tsblog/introducing-device-untyped-memory-sel4/>

# Full changelog


Use `git log 3.2.0..4.0.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/seL4>

# More details


See the
[4.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-4.0.0.pdf) included in the release for detailed descriptions of the new
features. Or ask on the mailing list!
