---
version: 6.0.0
redirect_from:
  - /sel4_release/seL4_6.0.0/
  - /sel4_release/seL4_6.0.0.html
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# seL4 Version 6.0.0 Release
 Announcing the release of `seL4 6.0.0` with the following changes:

## Highlights

### ARM 32-bit SMP

- Works (and tested) only on Sabre/ARM with up to 4 cores.
- Using the big kernel lock (same as x86 implementation).
- Boot core is assumed to have an ID of 0.
- Kernel bootstraps and initialises data structures only on the boot core.
- Root task proceeds on the boot core.
- Cores are assumed to have linear IDes.

#### ARM IPI caveats:

- Reserving the first two per-core SGIs for seL4's IPI operations: 0
      to do a remote call, 1 to reschedule.
- Relying on GIC.
- Reschedule IPIs are sent when migrating a thread.
- Remote call IPIs are sent if TLB and/or cache maintenance
      operations are required.
- Remote FPU operations (when migrating threads that use HW FPU).

### ARM FPU
ARMv7 32-bit support is added to implement a lazy FP save/restore
mechanism, required for user threads when they use the FPU. The
following caveats exist:

- Only support synchronous exceptions. No support for asynchronous ones.
- VFP opcodes are used instead of normal instructions to discard
      compiler warnings/errors.
- Support is limited to specific ARM subarchitectures we support and
      tested this feature on.
- Disable the FPU by default if users are not using it to
      avoid channels.
- FPU support is not verified yet.
- Will not work properly if using a VM that's running alongside
      other VMs/threads that are using the FPU.
- Any trapped FPU instruction (e.g. traps that need support code or
      deprecated vectored VFP operations) are forwarded to the user as
      a fault.

## Changes


- aarch32 - Implement lazy FP save/restore
- ARM SMP support
- add `seL4_DebugDumpScheduler` debug syscall
- x86: Split large structs into portions (See upgrade notes below)
- License fixups

# Upgrade notes


- This release is not source compatible with previous releases.
- `seL4_DebugDumpScheduler` has had its only argument removed as it
        was unused.
- On x86 some structs in the Bootinfo have been rearranged. This
        only affects `seL4_VBEModeInfoBlock_t` which is used if VESA
        BIOS Extensions (VBE) information is being used.

# Full changelog
 Use `git log 5.2.0..6.0.0` in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4>

# More details
 See the
[6.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-6.0.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!
