---
version: 7.0.0
redirect_from:
  - /sel4_release/seL4_7.0.0/
  - /sel4_release/seL4_7.0.0.html
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# seL4 Version 7.0.0 Release
 Announcing the release of `seL4 7.0.0` with the following changes:

## Changes


- Support for building standalone ia32 kernel added in `e7327fa6df3`
- ia32: Set sensible defaults for FS and GS selectors in
        `c2f6d48bcf2`
- aarch64: Use tpidrro_el0 for IPC buffer instead of tpidr_el0
        in `ae9fe9b5d18`
- More seL4 manual documentation added for aarch64 object
        invocations
- Default `NUM_DOMAINS` set to 16 for x86-64 standalone builds in
        `baa9798f793`
- libsel4: Return `seL4_Error` in invocation stubs in `8fb06eecff9`
        ** This is a source code level breaking change **
- Add a CMake based build system in `0b73072016e`
- x86: Increase TCB size for debug builds in `4c8be8f4f91`
- libsel4: x86: Remove nested struct declarations in `a8d6315eb16`
        ** This is a source code level breaking change **
- Bugfix: x86: Unmap pages when delete non final frame caps in
        `08b9265563a`

# Notable changes


- CMake based build system added: Initial experimental support has
        been added for using CMake for building the kernel and some user
        level libraries. Currently the only project that takes advantage
        of this is seL4test when using the cmake.xml manifest
        in sel4test-manifest. Documentation can be found at:
        <https://github.com/seL4/seL4_tools/tree/master/cmake-tool>

# Upgrade notes


- This release is not source compatible with previous releases.
- seL4 invocations that previously returned long now return
        `seL4_Error` which is an enum. Our libraries have already been
        updated to reflect this change, but in other places where seL4
        invocations are used directly, the return types will need to be
        updated to reflect this change.
- On x86 some structs in the Bootinfo have been rearranged. This
        only affects `seL4_VBEModeInfoBlock_t` which is used if VESA
        BIOS Extensions (VBE) information is being used.

# Known issues


- One of our tests is non-deterministicly becoming unresponsive on
        the SMP release build on the Sabre IMX.6 platform, which is a
        non verified configuration of the kernel. We are working on
        fixing this problem, and will likely do a point release once it
        is fixed.

# Full changelog
 Use `git log 6.0.0..7.0.0` in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4>

# More details
 See the
[7.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-7.0.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!
