---
version: 9.0.0
redirect_from:
  - /sel4_release/seL4_9.0.0/
  - /sel4_release/seL4_9.0.0.html
project: sel4
parent: /releases/seL4.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# seL4 Version 9.0.0 Release
 Announcing the release of `seL4 9.0.0` with the following changes:

9.0.0 2018-04-11: BREAKING

# Changes
 * Debugging option on x86 for syscall interface to read/write MSRs (this is an, equally dangerous, alternative to
   dangerous code injection)
 * Mitigation for Meltdown (https://meltdownattack.com) on x86-64 implemented. Mitigation is via a form of kernel
   page table isolation through the use of a Static Kernel Image with Microstate (SKIM) window that is used for
   trapping to and from the kernel address space. This can be enabled/disabled through the build configuration
   depending on whether you are running on vulnerable hardware or not.
 * Mitigation for Spectre (https://spectreattack.com) on x86 against the kernel implemented. Default is software
   mitigation and is the best performing so users need to do nothing. This does *not* prevent user processes from
   exploiting each other.
 * x86 configuration option for performing branch prediction barrier on context switch to prevent Spectre style
   attacks between user processes using the indirect branch predictor
 * x86 configuration option for flushing the RSB on context switch to prevent Spectre style attacks between user
   processes using the RSB
 * Define extended bootinfo header for the x86 TSC frequency
 * x86 TSC frequency exported in extended bootinfo header
 * `archInfo` is no longer a member of the bootinfo struct. Its only use was for TSC frequency on x86, which
   can now be retrieved through the extended bootinfo
 * Invocations to set thread priority and maximum control priority (MCP) have changed.
     - For both invocations, users must now provide a TCB capability `auth`
     - The requested MCP/priority is checked against the MCP of the `auth` capability.
     - Previous behavior checked against the invoked TCB, which could be subject to the confused deputy
       problem.
 * `seL4_TCB_Configure` no longer takes prio, mcp as an argument. Instead these fields must be set separately
   with `seL4_TCB_SetPriority` and `seL4_TCB_SetMCPriority`.
 * `seL4_TCB_SetPriority` and `seL4_TCB_SetMCPriority` now take `seL4_Word` instead of `seL4_Uint8`.
       - `seL4_MaxPrio` remains at 255.
 * `seL4_TCB_SetSchedParams` is a new method where MCP and priority can be set in the same sytsem call.
 * Size of the TCB object is increased for some build configurations

# Upgrade notes
 * `seL4_TCB_Configure` calls that set priority should be changed to explicitly call `seL4_TCB_SetSchedParams`
   or `SetPriority`
 * `seL4_TCB_Configure` calls that set MCP should be changed to explicitly call `seL4_TCB_SetSchedParams`
   or `seL4_TCB_SetMCPriority`

---


# Full changelog
 Refer to the git log in
<https://github.com/seL4/seL4> using `git log 8.0.0..9.0.0`

# More details
 See the
[9.0.0 manual](http://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-9.0.0.pdf) included in the release or ask on the mailing list!
