---
project: sel4runtime
title: "seL4 11.0.x-compatible"
archive: true
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Updates to sel4runtime from seL4 10.1.x to 11.0.x

- Created `sel4runtime` project to be a runtime for running a C or C-compatible process, i.e. one with a C-like main, in a minimal seL4 environment.
  - Added seL4 roottask runtime entry points for: AARCH32, AARCH64, IA32, x86_64, RISC-V 32-bit and RISC-V 64-bit with supporting documentation for calling conventions.
  - Added regular runtime entry points for non-roottask new processes for the above architectures.
  - Added CMake rules for replacing musllibc's CRT files with a CMake object library.
  - Added CMake configuration option, `Sel4RuntimeRootStack`, for setting Roottask's initial stack size.
  - Create runtime datastructure containing:
    - process name likely read from `argv[0]`.
    - AUX vector with additional seL4 specific AUX values:
      - `AT_SEL4_BOOT_INFO`: `seL4_BootInfo` pointer in current vspace.
      - `AT_SEL4_IPC_BUFFER_PTR`: IPC buffer pointer in current vspace of initial thread.
      - `AT_SEL4_TCB`: TCP capability `seL4_CPtr` to initial thread's TCB object.
    - Environment vector.
    - Bootinfo pointer to be initialized with bootinfo address from AUX vector.
    - ELF headers to be initialized with info from AUX vectors.
    - Initial thread information:
      - Thread local storage image information.
      - Cap to TCB if given in AUX vectors.
      - IPC buffer: if given in AUX vectors.
  - Add support for calling constructors and destructors.
  - Add support for managing threads' static TLS regions.
  - set a global `__sysinfo` pointer if `AT_SYSINFO` is set in AUX vector.
  - Call `main()` with required `argc` and `argv` arguments.
  - Support for setting TLS variables of threads remotely.
  - Call `seL4_DebugNameThread` if the runtime has a process name and the initial thread has a TCB cap
    and IPC buffer set.
  - Add `Findsel4runtime.cmake` module for importing as CMake module.
