---
version: capdl-0.2.0
project: capdl
parent: /releases/capDL.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# capDL Version capdl-0.2.0 Release

Announcing the release of `capdl-0.2.0` with the following changes:

capdl-0.2.0 2020-10-26
Using seL4 version 12.0.0

## Changes

* Convert to SPDX license tags. This includes marking all documentation files CC-BY-SA-4.0.

* Build system:
  - Support `CMakeForegroundComplexCommands`. This enables long-running build steps like Haskell installation to
    directly print to the console.
  - Make PLATFORM_SIFT agnostic of the build system directory layout
  - Save the binary artifacts for the capDL-tool in an out-of-build-tree directory, this will not rebuild in future if
    it can find a previously built artifact.
  - Migrate scripts to python3
* Add `seL4_BadgeBits` constant and update python-capdl-tool to directly query the object_sizes dictionary. This allows
  for templates to use badge sizes.
* Add support for Arm smmu v2.
* Add support for Arm GetTrigger and GetTriggerCore seL4 invocations. This enables specs to correctly specify interrupt
  trigger mode and core affinities on Arm.
* Add TCB Resume field to capDL object and support raw TCB object creation.
* Add GitHub actions scripts. These scripts replicate internal CI checks directly on GitHub

### capDL-tool

* rework validObjCap and check TCB slots, which allows vcpus for all architectures.
* convert CapDL language specification to Markdown.

### Capdl-loader-app

* Improve log output.
* Initialise libc in debug builds.
* Add check to only flush and invalidate kernel memory regions in capdl loader on Arm. Add platform_info header with
  memory window.
* Add vcpu support for aarch64.
* Handle IRQ binding to badged notifications properly: If an irq is bound to a notification with a non-zero badge, a
  badged capability is minted and used.  Previously, the IRQ was bound to the unbadged notification.
* Track number of used untypeds during object allocation and fail more gracefully if they run out.
* Improve debugging printouts.
* Fix issue where large DTB images inside BootInfo would overlap reserved memory address used to initialise frames.
* Remove CONFIG_CAPDL_LOADER_ALLOW_NO_CSPACE config option as it has been unused for a while.

### Capdl-linker:

* Optimize spec generation performance:
  - Sort elf symbols by their vaddr.
  - Replace linear search with binary when looking for virtual addresses.
* Fix Python syntax warnings when `capdl_linker.py` is invoked.

## Upgrade Notes


# Full changelog
 Use `git log 0.1.0..capdl-0.2.0` in
<https://github.com/seL4/capdl>

# More details
 See the
[documentation](https://github.com/seL4/capdl/tree/master/capDL-tool/doc)
or ask on the mailing list!
