---
version: 0.5.0
project: capdl
seL4: 15.0.0
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 seL4 International
---

# capDL Version 0.5.0 Release

Announcing the release of `0.5.0` with the following changes:


## 0.5.0 2026-03-31
Using seL4 version 15.0.0

### Changes

* Add support for domain schedules in `capDL-tool`, `capdl-loader-app`, and
  `python-capdl-tool`. Domain schedules can optionally be provided in a separate
  section of capDL specifications. By default, the provided schedule will be
  started after the initialiser finishes. Provide `no_start` to suppress domain
  schedule start.

  If the kernel is not configured for domain scheduling, any provided schedule
  will be ignored.


### Upgrade Notes

No changes are necessary for kernel configurations that do not use the domain
scheduler. For kernel configurations with domain scheduler support, instead of
providing the schedule in a separate `.c` file, the domain schedule should be
provided in the capDL specification instead. Schedules can be transcribed one to
one without change, leaving `domain_set_start` and `shift_index` at defaults.
The difference in intended behaviour is that the schedule will only start
running after the initialiser is finished. Schedules may previously have
included timing for initialisation --- consider if the schedule should be
adjusted accordingly.



## Full changelog

Use `git log 0.4.0..0.5.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/capdl>

## More details

See the [documentation](https://github.com/seL4/capdl/tree/master/capDL-tool/doc)
or ask on the mailing list!
