---
arm_hardware: true
cmake_plat: rpi3
xcompiler_arg: -DAARCH32=1
platform: Raspberry Pi 3-b
arch: ARMv8A
virtualization: true
iommu: false
soc: BCM2837
cpu: Cortex-A53
Status: Unverified
Contrib: Data61
Maintained: seL4 Foundation
parent: /Hardware/
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Raspberry PI 3 Model B and Model B+

{% include note.html %}
This is an experimental port and is not guaranteed to work.
{% include endnote.html %}

{% include hw-info.html %}

## Hardware

[raspberry-pi-3-b-reduced-schematics.pdf](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rpi3/raspberry-pi-3-b-reduced-schematics.pdf)

|Feature |Part |Datasheet |
|-|-|-|
|USB+ETH |SMSC LAN9514|[9514.pdf](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/9514.pdf)|
|SoC |BCM2837 | |

## Serial connection

Serial TX and RX are located at GPIO pins 14 and 15 respectively (See Hardware
schematic above)

## Reset

Short the jumper marked "RUN" between the expansion header and USB sockets to
perform a soft reset of the CPU.

## U-Boot

Right now, the default U-Boot will not successfully boot an seL4 image
on the RPi3, because of cache configuration issues in the seL4
ELFLoader. This problem can be remedied by having U-boot disable caches
before loading seL4. Unfortunately, the stock upstream U-boot used to
disable caches before loading the kernel image, but as of this patch
(<https://github.com/u-boot/u-boot/commit/995eab8b5b580b67394312b1621c60a71042cd18>),
U-boot no longer disables caches.

In order to obtain a U-boot binary that disables caching, you can either
compile U-Boot from source yourself, or you can
**[use this prebuilt U-Boot binary image which already works](https://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/u-boot-working-rpi3-32bit-v2017.11.bin)**.

If you choose to build your own U-boot, then clone U-boot from upstream,
then revert commit 995eab8b5b580b67394312b1621c60a71042cd18, and then
build it:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/u-boot/u-boot.git u-boot
cd u-boot
git revert 995eab8b5b580b67394312b1621c60a71042cd18
make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabi- rpi_3_32b_defconfig
make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabi-
```

This will enable you to get the most up-to-date U-boot which will boot
seL4 on the RPi3 successfully.

{% include note.html %}
Automatic revert is not going to work if you are using the latest version of
u-boot. You need to manually revert the change by looking at the changeset.
{% include endnote.html %}

Building u-boot using configuration `rpi_3_3b_defconfig` is going to
produce an image that can boot seL4 on the Raspberry PI Model 3B and
3B+. Unfortunately for the 3B+ tftp boot is not going to work using
this version of u-boot (the `tftp` command will report error
`No Ethernet found`).
In this case you need to build an image specific for the 3B+.
Unfortunately the provided defconfig file for the 3B+ model
(`rpi_3_b_plus_defconfig`) doesn't appear to build correctly.

In order to use tftp boot on a Raspberry PI Model 3B+, use the
defconfig for the 3B (as described above), then manually change the
`CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE` parameter in the `.config` from:

```config
CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE="bcm2837-rpi-3-b"
```

to:

```config
CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE="bcm2837-rpi-3-b-plus"
```

Now the generated image should be able to use the on-board
Ethernet device for TFTP.


## SD card setup

The PI boots from the first FAT32 partition on the SD card. Where files are
specified, they should be located in the root directory of this partition.

|Stage |Filename |Description |Source|
|-|-|-|-|
|FSBL |- |Mounts SD and loads SSBL |ROM |
|SSBL |bootcode.bin|Loads GPU firmware and boots GPU|<https://github.com/raspberrypi/firmware/tree/master/boot> |
|GPU firmware |start.elf or recovery.elf |Loads CPU bootloader and boots CPU |<https://github.com/raspberrypi/firmware/tree/master/boot> |
|Usually the Linux kernel, but could also be u-boot |u-boot.bin |u-boot| You can either [use our prebuilt U-boot which works](https://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/u-boot-working-rpi3-32bit-v2017.11.bin), or compile your own using the instructions above |
||config.txt|u-boot parameters |Add enable_uart=1 and kernel=u-boot.bin to the bottom of config.txt (Sample: <http://codepad.org/ykVYFSyP>) |
||uboot.env |u-boot saved environment |Generated by u-boot (default environment) bootcmd copied to bootcmd_orig bootcmd and bootdelay removed |

## Getting seL4 onto your Raspberry Pi 3

In this section you should find the two most convenient methods of getting a
kernel image booted on your RPi3 described. All three methods assume that you
have already built a kernel image using one of our projects---such as seL4Test:

{% include sel4test.md %}

The two methods described here are using the SD card and TFTP.

Both methods require you to use an SD card to provide the RPi3 firmware
with a U-boot bootloader it can load. The RPi3 doesn't store its
bootloader in flash memory, so it looks for the bootloader on the SD
card. Please see the section above for how to prepare your SD Card for
the base set of requirements; you can glance at the table above to see
the files you'll need and how to obtain them.

### SD Card

Get a micro-SD card ready by getting the base files copied onto it (See the
previous section).

Following this, copy your seL4 image (such as an seL4test image), onto
the SD card in its root directory - that's it. You can now remove the SD
Card from your PC and re-insert it into the RPi3, and power the RPi3 on.

When the RPi3 boots up, be sure to interrupt the boot process and drop
into the U-boot command prompt. From the U-boot command prompt, type
something the following: fatls mmc 0. If you don't see your seL4 image
file's name printed out, then you might need to double-check your steps
so far to make sure you didn't forget something along the way. If you
see your file listed, then do something like:

```
fatload mmc 0 0x10000000 sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```

### TFTP

Be sure you've set up the internal SD card with the required files for
U-Boot and the RPi3 firmware (consult the table above). Then make
certain that you've started up a TFTP server with your seL4 image being
served by that TFTP server. From there:

```
usb start
dhcp
tftp 0x10000000 <YOUR_TFTP_SERVER_IP_ADDRESS>:sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```

If you are using a Raspberry PI Model 3B+, make sure you build the
correct u-boot image as described above.

To use static IP instead of DHCP, use:

```
usb start
setenv ipaddr <RPI_IP_ADDRESS>
setenv serverip <YOUR_TFTP_SERVER_IP_ADDRESS>
tftp 0x10000000 sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```
