---
version: 1.4.0
project: microkit
parent: /releases/microkit.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Microkit Release 1.4.0

#### 2024-08-05

This release aims to add support for requested features by the community, in order to
allow more people to use and transition to Microkit. There is of course still more to
be done over the next couple of releases.

This release has no breaking changes.

### Features added

* Added support for RISC-V 64-bit based platforms.
* Added a new 'benchmark' configuration to allow access to the in-kernel
  performance tracking.
* Add the ability to configure the stack size of a PD.
* Export ARM architectural timer to user-space for the QEMU virt AArch64 platform.
  * This platform does not have any other timer so this is allows having a timer
    driver when simulating/developing Microkit systems with QEMU.
* Add new APIs for 'deferred' versions of `microkit_notify` and `microkit_irq_ack`.
  See the manual for details on when and how to use these.

### Other changes

* Made a number of internal changes to the tool to improve performance and peak memory
  usage.
    * The tool's performance was not noticeable until building larger systems with Microkit.
      Now invoking the Microkit tool with a large system should not take more than 500ms-1s to
      complete. There are more opportunities for optimisation if we do run into the tool slowing
      down however.

### Bug fixes

* Fixed the loader to not print unless in debug mode (matching the behaviour of
  the kernel and monitor).
* Add error checking for duplicate symbols between `setvar_vaddr` attributes and
  `setvar` elements.
* Fixed an internal issue that prevented the Monitor from printing out correct fault
  information in debug mode.
* Fixed the parsing of parent protection domains, previously non-trivial cases were
  leading to errors.
* Fixed the tool to explicitly skip ELF segments that are not declared as loadable,
  previously the tool assumed all segments would be loaded at runtime.
* Fix permissions applied to the distributed/packaged SDK. Previously this would cause
  `sudo` access to move/remove the SDK.
* Fixed an internal issue that prevented a memory region from being allocated at a fixed
  physical address that is not part of device memory (e.g within RAM).

### Board support

This release adds support for the following platforms:

* QEMU virt (RISC-V 64-bit)
* Pine64 Star64

## Full changelog

Use `git log 1.3.0..1.4.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/microkit/>

## More details

See the [documentation](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/blob/main/docs/manual.md)
or ask on the mailing list!
