---
version: 1.4.1
title: 1.4.1
project: microkit
parent: /projects/microkit/releases.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Microkit Release 1.4.1

#### 2024-08-16

This release contains various bug fixes. It does not include any new features.

* Fixed two bugs in the tool that lead to initialisation failure on larger Microkit systems.
* Disabled the `KernelArmVtimerUpdateVOffset` kernel configuration option by default.
  * This is necessary for Microkit VMs where they rely on knowing the actual surpassed time.
    More details are in the [pull request](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/pull/202).
* Enabled FPU for QEMU RISC-V virt and Pine64 Star64.
  * libmicrokit builds with hardware floating point enabled and, while it does not use the FPU,
    it means that every object linked with libmicrokit must also build with hardware floating
    point enabled. Previously using floating point operations would cause a crash in user-space.
* Fixed the loader link address for the MaaXBoard.
  * This does mean that if you target the MaaxBoard you will have to load Microkit images at
    a different address. See the manual for details.
* Added error checking for overlapping memory regions.
* Included every TCB register in the monitor logs when a fault occurs.
* Made the tool compile from source with a Rust version lower that 1.79.0.
* Specified a minimum Rust version for the tool (1.73.0).
* Fixed typo in the `--help` output of the tool.
* Minor README fixes.
* Updated PyYAML dependency in requirements.txt to 6.0.2 (from 6.0).

## Full changelog

Use `git log 1.4.0..1.4.1` in <https://github.com/seL4/microkit/>

## More details

See the [documentation](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/blob/main/docs/manual.md)
or ask on the mailing list!
