---
version: 2.0.0
project: microkit
parent: /releases/microkit.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Microkit Release 2.0.0

#### 2025-03-06

This release contains various bug fixes, quality-of-life changes, features, and
new board support.

This is a major version bump due to a breaking change. Below the release notes,
there is a section on how to upgrade from Microkit 1.4.1.

### Features

* Add support for virtual machines with multiple vCPUs.
* Add support for ARM platforms to use SMC forwarding.
    * Note that this requires a kernel option to be set that right now is not
      set by default on any ARM platforms in Microkit.
* Allow tool to target Linux AArch64 hosts, also available as a pre-built SDK
  starting in this release.
* Increase max PD name length to 64 characters (from 16).
* Add Nix flake for Nix users who want to build from source and not depend on
  the pre-built SDK.
* Allow specifying whether a channel end can notify the other.
* Memory Regions now default to the largest possible page size for the MR's size
  and alignment of virtual addresses of its mappings.
    * This is transparent to users, but can lead to improved performance and
      memory usage.
* Utilise kernel API for naming threads in debug mode.
    * Helps debugging any kernel error prints in certain cases.
* Monitor fault handling now prints if a virtual memory exception was likely due
  to a PD stack overflow.
* Monitor fault handling now decodes user-exceptions likely caused by LLVM's
  UBSAN and prints appropriate debug output (only on AArch64).
* Add `setvar_size` attribute for MR mappings, similar to `setvar_vaddr`.
* Add a new 'Internals' section in the manual to document how the Microkit
  actually works.
* libmicrokit APIs for notifying, IRQ acking and performing PPCs now print
  errors when an invalid channel is used in debug mode.
    * Previously this lead to a kernel error print that was not that useful from
      within a Microkit environment.
* System images are now relocatable.
    * Previously they required loading at particular address within physical
      memory, the Microkit loader will now relocate itself if loaded at a
      different range of physical memory. This can make the boot-loading process
      of Microkit images less fragile.

### Bug fixes

* Allow mapping in 'null' page. Necessary for virtual machines with guest memory
  that starts at guest physical address zero.
* More error checking for invalid mappings (e.g virtual address outside of valid
  range).
* Re-add warning for unused memory regions.
    * This is a bug fix since it used to be part of the tool before it was rewritten.
* Actually enforce the PPC priority rule that PPC is only allowed to PDs of higher
  priority.
    * Note that to fix this in the tool, we had to introduce a breaking change
      in the SDF. See upgrade notes for details.
* Fix a bug with kernel boot emulation that would sometimes occur when using
  the release mode of the kernel.
* Fix the GIC device addresses the loader was using for QEMU during
  initialisation.
* Fixed a bug preventing allocating a MR at certain fixed physical addresses.
* Better error reporting when allocation of a memory region fails.
* Fix allocation of Scheduling Context objects, previously we were allocating
  more than necessary.

### Board support

* i.MX8MP-EVK
* Pine64 RockPro64
* Ariane (aka CVA6)
* Cheshire
* Raspberry Pi 4B

### Upgrade notes

There is a single breaking change in this release, it affects any
System Description Files (SDF) that make use of channels with PPCs.

This was done for two reasons:

1. It allows the tool to statically check and enforce the existing rule that a
   PD that performs a PPC must be lower priority that the PD it is calling into.
2. It allows finer granularity on the channel ends. For example, previously
   all channels allowed notifies either way, now that decision is up to the
   user. The default behaviour remains the same, both ends are allowed to
   notify each other.

To upgrade, follow these steps:

1. Remove the `pp` attribute from any PDs that have it.
2. Go to each channel with the PD that had the `pp` attribute. Set `pp="true"`
   on the end of the channel for the PD that is *performing* the PPC.

Below is an example of upgrading a system that utilises PPCs.

From Microkit 1.4.1:
```xml
<protection_domain name="server" priority="254" pp="true">
    <program_image path="server.elf" />
</protection_domain>
<protection_domain name="client" priority="1">
    <program_image path="client.elf" />
</protection_domain>
<channel>
    <end pd="server" />
    <end pd="client" />
</channel>
```

To Microkit 2.0.0:
```xml
<protection_domain name="server" priority="254">
    <program_image path="server.elf" />
</protection_domain>
<protection_domain name="client" priority="1">
    <program_image path="client.elf" />
</protection_domain>
<channel>
    <end pd="server" />
    <end pd="client" pp="true" />
</channel>
```

Depending on your use-case you may also want to specify what end is allowed
to notify as well. For example, if the only communication between `server`
and `client` was PPC, you may want the channel to be the following:
```xml
<channel>
    <end pd="server" notify="false" />
    <end pd="client" notify="false" pp="true" />
</channel>
```

You can find all the details in the
[channel section of the manual](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/blob/2.0.0/docs/manual.md#channel).

## Full changelog

Use `git log 1.4.1..2.0.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/microkit/>

## More details

See the [documentation](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/blob/main/docs/manual.md)
or ask on the mailing list!
