---
version: 2.2.0
project: microkit
parent: /releases/microkit.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Microkit Release 2.2.0

#### 2026-03-31

This release contains various bug fixes, minor features, and new board support.

There are no breaking changes.

You can find the SDK downloads [here](../microkit).

### Feature changes

* Update to seL4 15.0.0.
* Support passing a separate ELF file used for symbol patching for PD program images.
  See the manual section on the `program_image` element for details.
* Support memory regions that are prefilled with data upon initialisation.
* Update flake to Nix 25.11.

### Bug fixes

* Fix version of uImage header emitted.
* Fix regressions from 2.1.0 that caused Raspberry Pi 4B to fail to boot.
* Fix false-positive error message when using setvar with memory regions that do not
  have an explicit physical address.
* Fix ELF image output to include empty string table, certain tools such as objcopy
  were complaining that the ELF was invalid.
* Fix some memory ranges overlapping false-positivies in the tool.
* Formatting fixes to libmicrokit's provided `__assert_fail`. It is now a weakly
  declared function so users can overwrite it with their own implementation.
* Fix internal bug that can cause initialisation to fail on ARM with the benchmarking configuration.
* Fix passive PD initialisation sometimes failing. There is still a possible race
  condition on SMP configurations, but single-core is fixed.
  See https://github.com/seL4/microkit/issues/91 for details.

### Board support

* Radxa ROCK 3B
* AMD Kria K26 SOM (based on the ZCU102)

## Full changelog

Use `git log 2.1.0..2.2.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/microkit/>

## More details

See the [documentation](/projects/microkit/manual/2.2.0/)
or ask on the mailing list!
