---
version: 2.3.0
project: microkit
parent: /releases/microkit.html
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 seL4 International
---

# Microkit Release 2.3.0

This release contains quite a few new features:

  * x86_64 IOMMU support (this entails a breaking change)
  * seL4_BootInfo support, for reading runtime parameters on x86_64
  * Various improvements to x86_64 virtual machines, such as being able to
    stop/start their execution.
  * Support for 'Cap Sharing' to give PDs access to specific TCBs or SCs,
    useful for userspace schedulers.
  * Support for the seL4 Domain Scheduler.

There are also a variety of bug fixes, especially for x86_64 systems, and
support for two new boards.

You can find the SDK downloads [here](../microkit).

## Breaking changes

* x86_64 systems are now built with the IOMMU turned on by default, as we have
  added new syntax to allow for the IOMMU to be configured (see below).
  However, previously the IOMMU was disabled in seL4, so systems which did DMA
  on x86_64 will now *stop working* without specifying the IOMMU setup.

* x86_64 IOAPIC IRQs had an inverted polarity; `polarity="low"` became high
  and `polarity="high"` became low.

* vCPUs now default to the same core as the VMM, instead of core 0. If you
  were relying on this behaviour, you should explicitly specify core 0.

* PCI 'bus:dev:func' syntax is no longer supported, use the correct 'bus:dev.func'
  syntax instead. This was an implementation bug which was more permissive
  than it was supposed to be.

* Virtual Machines on x86_64:

  * No longer support budget/period/priority. This did not work previously,
    as they share a TCB/SC with the VMM.

  * The VMM on x86_64 cannot have children, nor receive PPCs.
    This was previously allowed but had several complex restrictions (such as
    not receiving messages after a `vmenter`) so have been disallowed.

* If you were not using the `libmicrokit` linker script (e.g. rust-seL4 users),
  the `__sel4_ipc_buffer_obj` is no longer declared in the linker script, and
  is instead allocated by the tool at a fixed virtual address above the stack
  which is now reserved. If you were assuming a specific virtual address for the
  IPC buffer, this would be broken.

## Feature changes

* Update to 16.0.0 release of seL4.

* Support an 'fpu' attribute on protection domains, following [RFC-18](
  https://sel4.github.io/rfcs/implemented/0180-fpu-switching.html), which allows
  for FPU access to be disabled on a per-PD basis.

* The debug-only (unverified) HardwareDebugAPI has been enabled and is available
  on most x86_64 and AArch64 platforms.

* A new 'cap sharing' feature. The SDF now supports a `<cspace>` element and
  support for placing caps to TCBs, SchedContexts, and VSpaces of other PDs
  into the CSpace of the current PD. This can be useful for user space schedulers
  that are not the fault-handlers (i.e. use parent-child hierarchy).

* It is now possible to turn x86 vCPUs (VMs) on or off.
  Use the new `microkit_vcpu_x86_on` and `microkit_vcpu_x86_off` APIs

* AArch64 EL1 (non-hypervisor) platforms are now supported.

* There is a new (experimental) `--viper-output` argument to the tool, which
  is part of some new (experimental) verification work of Microkit PDs using
  the [Viper tools from ETH Zürich](http://viper.ethz.ch).

* Microkit PDs are now a 2-level CSpace. This should not have any impact on
  users.

* It is now possible to create memory regions that are prefilled with bootinfo
  from the capDL initialiser. This includes the VBE, MBMAP, ACPI RSDP, Framebuffer,
  and TSC frequency types exported by seL4.

* New function `microkit_pd_resume()` which resumes a stopped child PD. Previously,
  only stop and start (which does resume but requires a program counter) existed.

* New support for configuring the IOMMU on x86_64 systems with the
  `<io_address_space>` element. See the `x86_64_iommu_dma_test` example packaged
  in the SDK for more details, as well as the manual section on IOMMU.
  Only 4KiB pages are supporting for the IOMMU due to kernel limitations.

* Support for the seL4 domain schedule now that the [RFC-20 Runtime Schedules](
  https://sel4.github.io/rfcs/implemented/0200-domain-schedules.html) has been
  added to seL4. This is useful for systems which want isolated subsystems
  with limited information flow between them.

## Bug fixes

* TQMA8XQP1GB loader address has been fixed as it was collided with reserved
  regions in memory.
* IOAPIC IRQ polarity was inverted.
* The loader now only maps in the loader memory, UART, and kernel regions, as
  otherwise (instruction) speculative accesses to device memory can occur.
  Please see [PR 464 for more details](https://github.com/seL4/microkit/pull/464).
* A `microkit_deferred_notify()` or `microkit_deferred_irq_ack()` would be
  lost if you sent a reply from a `protected()` call, or from a `fault()` handler.
  Now we perform `seL4_Send` on the Notification or IRQHandler capability
  before replying to the PPC or Fault.
* A bug with [high-address regions allocated the wrong memory](
  https://github.com/seL4/rust-sel4/issues/319) in the capDL initialiser was
  fixed.
* A bug with certain systems that caused the Microkit tool to panic with the
  below message has been fixed.

  ```
  thread 'main' (414114) panicked at tool/microkit/src/capdl/allocation.rs:225:17:
  assertion `left == right` failed
  ```

### Board support

* 'stm32mp2' for the STM32MP2 evaluation board.
* 'qemu_virt_aarch64_el1' for QEMU/KVM on Linux AArch64 hosts (which don't support
   nested virtualisation).

### Notes for developers

* There is a new `--override-kernel` option to the tool that allows one to
  use an SDK build of Microkit but with a different seL4 kernel ELF.
* We now have basic CI that runs Microkit images on real hardware.
* We now recommend the use of the [Google repo-manifest 'microkit-manifest'](
  https://github.com/seL4/microkit-manifest) which tracks the supported version
  of seL4 to be used for testing the Microkit. It also records the latest build
  of the main branch which passed CI.

## Full changelog

Use `git log 2.2.0..2.3.0` in <https://github.com/seL4/microkit/>

## More details

See the [documentation](/projects/microkit/manual/2.3.0/)
or ask on the mailing list!
