---
project: sel4bench
title: "seL4 11.0.x-compatible"
archive: true
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---
# Updates to seL4Bench from seL4 10.1.x to 11.0.x

## External

- Add new VCPU benchmarks.  This new benchmark app benchmarks the following overheads:
    - The overhead of a `HVC` privilege escalation from EL1 to EL2.
    - The overhead of an `ERET` privilege de-escalation from EL2 to EL1.
    - The overhead of a `NULL` hypercall into the seL4 EL2 kernel.
    - The overhead of an `seL4_Call` syscall.
    - The overhead of an `seL4_Reply` syscall.
- Add griddle support with `easy-settings.cmake` file.
- Force FPU state to only be restored when used.
    This ensures that during benchmarks where the FPU state isn't being used
    that the FPU state does not get restored. This ensures that context
    switches in benchmarks accurately show the case where FPU restore is not
    performed.
- Allow for platform counters to be enabled in IPC benchmark.
- Update `page_mapping` benchmark to remap pages using the changed kernel API.

## Internal

- `sel4bench`: make `plat_setup` a weak symbol and remove stub functions for each platform
- `sel4bench`: Add newlines to `printf` calls.
    `printf` buffering the output makes debugging harder as output becomes
    ordered differently.
- Update usages of `libcpio` to match new api.
- Style files.
- `smp`: use `SEL4BENCH_RESET_CCNT`. This is a generic function for achieving what the code was hardcoded to
    armv7 for.
- `sel4bench`: start looking for untyped at `seL4_MaxUntypedBits`.
- Use `sel4runtime`.
- `libsel4benchsupport`: fix child process stack init by ensuring `benchmark_spawn_process` leaves the stack top
    intact.
- `sel4bench`: remove `autoconf.h` and global `Configuration` library and link configuration libraries explicitly.
- Rename configuration libraries to follow a consistent naming convention.
- Use `sel4rpc` library for allocating untypeds.
- Remove `sel4platsupport_timer` usages and replace with `ltimer` and new `ps_io_irq_t` interfaces.
- Rename `CONFIG_KERNEL_RT` to `CONFIG_KERNEL_MCS`.
- Fix SMP thread checkpointing. This fixes breakage in SMP x86_64 benchmark.
- Refactor buildsystem to keep up with underlying changes.  Try to also make configuration scripts easier to follow.
- Use device tree for binding drivers to devices on Arm.
